Add Upcasting for FSDP in Mixed Precision. Add Concept Guide for FSPD and DeepSpeed. (#2674)
huggingface/accelerate: docs/source/concept_guides/fsdp_and_deepspeed.md

## Configuring Functionalities

Model tensors are split into different GPUs in attempt scale up model sizes; this is termed *sharding* in FSDP, and *partitioning* in DeepSpeed. FSDP sharding and DeepSpeed ZeRO (partitioning) stages, are configured by `--fsdp_sharding_strategy`, and `--zero_stage`, respectively.  In particular, FSDP `FULL_SHARD` maps to DeepSpeed ZeRO stage `3`; see this [comprehensive mapping between FSDP sharding and DeepSpeed ZeRO settings](../usage_guides/fsdp#mapping-between-fsdp-sharding-strategies-and-deepspeed-zero-stages). The below table summarizes and groups similar settings:

Group | Framework | Configuration | Example | Restrictions (if any)
--|--|--|--|--
sharding / partitioning | FSDP<br>DeepSpeed | `--fsdp_sharding_strategy`<br>`--zero_stage` | `1` (`FULL_SHARD`) <br>`3` | 
offload | FSDP<br>DeepSpeed | `--fsdp_offload_params`<br>`--offload_param_device`<br>`--offload_optimizer_device` | `true`<br>`cpu`<br>`cpu` | all or nothing <br><br> 
model loading | FSDP<br>DeepSpeed | <span style="white-space:nowrap;">`--fsdp_cpu_ram_efficient_loading`</span><br>`--zero3_init_flag` | `true`<br>`true` | <br>only ZeRO 3

> efficient checkpointing | FSDP<br>DeepSpeed | `--fsdp_state_dict_type`<br>`--zero3_save_16bit_model` |  `SHARDED_STATE_DICT`<br>`true` |  <br>only ZeRO 3

Author: I have done the following:
- updated the **Checkpointing** section to specify the equivalence of `zero3_save_16bit_model=True` and `FULL_STATE_DICT`.
- Added a warning in the data precision section, to mention that if FSDP has upcasted a low precision model, then the checkpoints will be saved in the upcasted precision.

For DeepSpeed, the prefetching is always on, and only certain hyperparams like `stage3_prefetch_bucket_size` [can be configured for Zero3](https://www.deepspeed.ai/docs/config-json/#parameter-offloading); 🤗 [`accelerate`] will set these hyperparams automatically.

<Tip>

    For FSDP set `fsdp_backward_prefetch: BACKWARD_PRE` for improved throughputs if memory allows.

</Tip>

**Model Loading**

While FSDP require an explicit `--fsdp_cpu_ram_efficient_loading true` to activate efficient model loading, 🤗 `transformers` will activate the similar feature whenever DeepSpeed Zero3 is used.

<Tip>

    For FSDP, whenever setting `--fsdp_cpu_ram_efficient_loading true`, please also set `--fsdp_sync_module_states true`, otherwise the model will not load properly. 

</Tip>

**Model**

FSDP requires an explicit `--fsdp_auto_wrap_policy` for the algorithm to decide how to schedule the all-gather and reduce-scatter operations. But for DeepSpeed this is transparent to the user.

<Tip>

>     For FSDP, simply set `fsdp_auto_wrap_policy: TRANSFORMER_BASED_WRAP`. Do not set `fsdp_transformer_layer_cls_to_wrap` if using the latest `transformers` versions.

Author: added

</Tip>

**Parameters Summoning**

FSDP requires an explicit `--fsdp_use_orig_params` flag if using `torch.compile`, see [the pytorch documenation](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/fsdp.html#module-torch.distributed.fsdp). For DeepSpeed this is transparent to the user.

<Tip>

    For FSDP, when using `torch.compile` please set `fsdp_use_orig_params: True`.

</Tip>

**Training**

Deepspeed requires explicit `--gradient_accumulation_steps` and `--gradient_clipping` flags. For FSDP this is transparent to the user.

<Tip>

    When using DeepSpeed, set `gradient_accumulation_steps: "auto"` and `gradient_clipping: "auto"` to automatically pick up values set in [`TrainingArguments`].

</Tip>

## On Differences in Data Precision Handling

> To discuss the how data precision is handled in both FSDP and Deepspeed, it is instructive to first give a flow of how model parameters are handled in these frameworks. Before the model / optimizer parameters are distributed across GPUs, parameter preparation is involved to first "flatten" them to  one-dimensional [`torch.Tensor`](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/tensors.html#torch-tensor)'s. The implementation of FSDP / DeepSpeed varies in the respect of the `dtype` in which these "flattened" parameters are stored, and there are ramifications with regards to how [`torch.Optimizer`](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/optim.html#module-torch.optim)'s allocate their `dtypes`'s. The table below outlines the processes for both frameworks; the "Local" column indicates the process occurring at a per-gpu level, therefore any memory overheads by upcasting should be understood to be amortized by the number of gpus used.

Author: Done I am adding a tip

<!--Copyright 2024 The HuggingFace Team. All rights reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.

⚠️ Note that this file is in Markdown but contain specific syntax for our doc-builder (similar to MDX) that may not be
rendered properly in your Markdown viewer.
-->

# Moving between FSDP And DeepSpeed (DRAFT)

> 🤗 Accelerate offers flexibilty of training frameworks, by integrating two extremely powerful tools for distributed training, namely [Pytorch FSDP](../usage_guides/fsdp.md) and [Microsoft DeepSpeed](../usage_guides/deepspeed.md). The aim fo this article is to draw parallels, as well as to outline potential differences, to empower the user to switch seamlessly between these two frameworks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
🤗 Accelerate offers flexibilty of training frameworks, by integrating two extremely powerful tools for distributed training, namely [Pytorch FSDP](../usage_guides/fsdp.md) and [Microsoft DeepSpeed](../usage_guides/deepspeed.md). The aim of this tutorial is to draw parallels, as well as to outline potential differences, to empower the user to switch seamlessly between these two frameworks.
```

> <Tip>
>   To switch between the frameworks, we recommend 🤗 `accelerate launch`.
> 
>   Simply pass [FSDP and DeepSpeed arguments](../package_reference/cli#accelerate-launch) directly to `accelerate launch` or pass `--config_file`. No need for any code instrumentation!
> 
>   Exemplar 🤗 Accelerate configurations can be found here for [DeepSpeed](../usage_guides/deepspeed#accelerate-deepspeed-plugin) and [FSDP](../usage_guides/fsdp#how-it-works-out-of-the-box). 
>  
> </Tip>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Tip>

  To switch between the frameworks, we recommend launching code 🤗 `accelerate launch` passing in the correct config file with `--config_file`, or passing in the respective arguments directly for [FSDP and DeepSpeed](../package_reference/cli#accelerate-launch) .

  Example 🤗 Accelerate configurations can be found here for [DeepSpeed](../usage_guides/deepspeed#accelerate-deepspeed-plugin) and [FSDP](../usage_guides/fsdp#how-it-works-out-of-the-box), or in the [example zoo under "Launch Configurations"](../usage_guides/explore)
 
</Tip>
```

> This article is written with 🤗 Accelerate in mind, for single-node, multi-GPU, scenarios only. No TPU aspects will be considered.

Reviewer: As it's a concept guide in our documentation, no need to state it's for accelerate

```suggestion
<Tip warning={true}>

This tutorial is for single-node, multi-GPU, scenarios only.

</Tip>
```

efficient checkpointing | FSDP<br>DeepSpeed | `--fsdp_state_dict_type`<br>`--zero3_save_16bit_model` |  `SHARDED_STATE_DICT`<br>`true` |  <br>only ZeRO 3
pipeline | FSDP<br><br>DeepSpeed | `--fsdp_forward_prefetch`<br>`--fsdp_backward_prefetch`<br>None | `true`<br>`BACKWARD_PRE` | <br><br>
model | FSDP<br><br>DeepSpeed |  `--fsdp_auto_wrap_policy`<br><span style="white-space:nowrap;">`--fsdp_transformer_layer_cls_to_wrap`</span><br>None | `TRANSFORMER_BASED_WRAP`<br><Layer Class> |<br>Usually not needed <br>Transparent to user.
parameters summoning | FSDP<br>DeepSpeed | `--fsdp_use_orig_params`<br>None | `true` | required for `torch.compile`<br>Transparent to user
parameters syncing | FSDP<br>DeepSpeed | `--fsdp_sync_module_states`<br>None | `true` | 
training | FSDP<br>DeepSpeed | None<br>`--gradient_accumulation_steps`<br>`--gradient_clipping` | <br>`auto`<br>`auto` | Transparent to user

For detailed descriptions of the above, refer to [🤗 `Accelerate` launch documentation](../package_reference/cli#accelerate-launch).

<Tip>

    To access other DeepSpeed configurations, such as mixed precision settings, 

>     you need to link a `deepspeed_config_file`, see the [documentation](../usage_guides/deepspeed#deepspeed-config-file).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    you need to pass in a `--deepspeed_config_file`, see the [documentation](../usage_guides/deepspeed#deepspeed-config-file).  
```

    
</Tip>

> **Checkpointing**

Reviewer: Let's do `###` blocks instead, so they'll show up in the sidebar
```suggestion
### Checkpointing
```

Author: thanks! this is done in https://github.com/huggingface/accelerate/pull/2674/commits/af71e9f7184fed1bd0696c68bc305e1015fa04b9

Do note that while FSDP can be configured via `--fsdp_state_dict_type` to save either full / sharded checkpoints.

<Tip>

>     For DeepSpeed Zero3, it is recommended to also pass a `--zero3_save_16bit_model true` in the [`Accelerate` launch arguments](../package_reference/cli#accelerate-launch), which conviniently consolidates the model to a single rank and saves; this is the FSDP equivalent of `fsdp_state_dict_type: FULL_STATE_DICT`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For DeepSpeed Zero3, it is recommended to also pass a `--zero3_save_16bit_model true`, which conveniently consolidates the model to a single rank and saves; this is the FSDP equivalent of `fsdp_state_dict_type: FULL_STATE_DICT`.
```

For detailed descriptions of the above, refer to [🤗 `Accelerate` launch documentation](../package_reference/cli#accelerate-launch).

<Tip>

    To access other DeepSpeed configurations, such as mixed precision settings, 
    you need to pass in a `--deepspeed_config_file`, see the [documentation](../usage_guides/deepspeed#deepspeed-config-file).  

    DeepSpeed can be also configured via [`DeepSpeedPlugin`], e.g., `DeepSpeedPlugin.zero_stage` is equivalent of `--zero_stage`, and `DeepSpeedPlugin.hf_ds_config` can be used to pass `--deepeed_config_file.`

</Tip>

<Tip>

    FSDP can be also configured via [`FullyShardedDataParallelPlugin`], e.g., `FullyShardedDataParallelPlugin.sharding_strategy` is equivalent of `--fsdp_sharding_strategy`.
    
</Tip>

### Checkpointing

Do note that while FSDP can be configured via `--fsdp_state_dict_type` to save either full / sharded checkpoints.

<Tip>

    For DeepSpeed Zero3, it is recommended to also pass a `--zero3_save_16bit_model true`, which conveniently consolidates the model to a single rank and saves; this is the FSDP equivalent of `fsdp_state_dict_type: FULL_STATE_DICT`.

</Tip>

### Offloading

> FSDP only allows *all-or-nothing* offload, but DeepSpeed can offload parameters and optimizer differently. Furthermore, DeepSpeed also supports [offloading to NVME](https://www.deepspeed.ai/docs/config-json/#parameter-offloading).

Author: done

<Tip>

    For FSDP, simply set `fsdp_auto_wrap_policy: TRANSFORMER_BASED_WRAP`. With the latest [`transformers`] versions, we try our best to figure out the suitable `fsdp_transformer_layer_cls_to_wrap` for HF transformers models. However, if you get an error regarding it, please specify this.

</Tip>

### Parameters Summoning

FSDP requires an explicit `--fsdp_use_orig_params` flag if using `torch.compile`, see [the pytorch documenation](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/fsdp.html#module-torch.distributed.fsdp). For DeepSpeed this is transparent to the user.

<Tip>

    For FSDP, when using `torch.compile` please set `fsdp_use_orig_params: True`.

</Tip>

## Training

Deepspeed requires explicit `--gradient_accumulation_steps` and `--gradient_clipping` flags. For FSDP this is transparent to the user.

<Tip>

    When using DeepSpeed, set `gradient_accumulation_steps: "auto"` and `gradient_clipping: "auto"` to automatically pick up values set in the [`Accelerator`] or [`TrainingArguments`] (if using `transformers`).

</Tip>

## On Differences in Data Precision Handling

> To discuss the how data precision is handled in both FSDP and Deepspeed, it is instructive to first give a flow of how model parameters are handled in these frameworks. Before the model / optimizer parameters are distributed across GPUs, parameter preparation is involved to first "flatten" them to  one-dimensional [`torch.Tensor`](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/tensors.html#torch-tensor)'s. The implementation of FSDP / DeepSpeed varies in the respect of the `dtype` in which these "flattened" parameters are stored, and there are ramifications with regards to how [`torch.Optimizer`](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/optim.html#module-torch.optim)'s allocate their `dtypes`'s. The table below outlines the processes for both frameworks; the "Local" column indicates the process occurring at a per-gpu level, therefore any memory overheads by upcasting should be understood to be amortized by the number of gpus used.

Reviewer 2: - I don't know what "give a flow" means - did you mean "give an overview"?
- there should be no `'s` but `s` in ` #torch-tensor)'s. ` above

<Tip>

    As a rule of thumb, for stable training with automatic mixed precision, all the trainable parameters have to be in `torch.float32`.

</Tip>

Process | Local | Framework | Details
--|--|--|--

> Loading, i.e., [`AutoModel.from_pretrained(..., torch_dtype)`] |  

Reviewer 2: probably would be more clear as:

```
`AutoModel.from_pretrained(..., torch_dtype=torch_dtype)
```

Preparation, i.e., creation of "flat params" | ✅ | FSDP<br>DeepSpeed | created in `torch_dtype`.<br> disregards `torch_dtype`, created in `float32`.
Optimizer initialization | ✅ | FSDP<br>DeepSpeed  | creates parameters in `torch_dtype`<br> creates parameters in `float32`
Training Step, i.e, forward, backward, reduction | | FSDP<br>DeepSpeed  | follows [`MixedPrecision`](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/fsdp.html#torch.distributed.fsdp.MixedPrecision)<br> follows `deepspeed_config_file` mixed precision settings.
Optimizer (Pre-Step) | ✅ | FSDP<br>DeepSpeed | upcasting (if any) to `torch_dtype`<br>upcasted to `float32`
Optimizer (Actual Step) | ✅ | FSDP<br>DeepSpeed  | occurs in `torch_dtype` <br> occurs in `float32`.

<Tip warning={true}>

    Therefore when using DeepSpeed a small number of GPUs, be aware of potentially significant memory overheads due to the upcasting during preperation.

</Tip>

<Tip>

    With FSDP, in the absence of mixed precision, it is possible to operate the [`torch.Optimizer`](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/optim.html#module-torch.optim) in low precision `torch_dtype`, which may be helpful when using small number of GPUs. 

</Tip>

<Tip warning={true}>

>     With mixed precision, then FSDP and DeepSpeed will upcast in the model preperation step (c.f. table above). But do note that FSDP will then save checkpoints in the upcasted precision; Deepspeed may still save low precision checkpoints if `--zero3_save_16bit_model` is specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    With mixed precision, FSDP and DeepSpeed will upcast in the model preparation step (c.f. table above). But do note that FSDP will then save checkpoints in the upcasted precision; Deepspeed may still save low precision checkpoints if `--zero3_save_16bit_model` is specified.
```
